Add pandas comparison (#2378)
JuliaData/DataFrames.jl: docs/src/man/comparisons.md

# Comparisons

This section compares DataFrames.jl with other data manipulation frameworks in Python, R, and Stata.

A sample data set can be created using the following code:

```julia
df = DataFrame(id = 'a':'f', grp = [1,2,1,2,1,2], x = 6:-1:1, y = 4:9, z = 3:8)
```

## Comparison with the Python package pandas

The following table compares the main functions of DataFrames.jl with the Python package pandas (version 1.1.0):

```python
df = pd.DataFrame(
        {'grp': [1,2,1,2,1,2], 'x': range(6,0,-1), 'y': range(4,10), 'z': range(3,9)},
        index = list('abcdef'))
```

Note that pandas allows row indexing by labels. For DataFrames.jl, you can achieve the same result via row filtering as shown below.

### Accessing data

| Operation                  | Example                     | pandas                 | DataFrames.jl            |
|:---------------------------|:----------------------------|:-----------------------|:-------------------------|

> | Cell indexing by location  | Cell at row 2, column 2     | `df.iloc[1, 1]`        | `df[2, 2]`               |

Reviewer: Mention 1-based indexing above (or below) this table? Not saying anything about it could be confusing.

Author: I will add a note below the table.

Author: Done

### Joining data frames

| Operation             | pandas                                                  | DataFrames.jl                           |
|:----------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|
| Inner join            | `pd.merge(df1, df2, how = 'inner', on = ['id', 'grp'])` | `innerjoin(df1, df2, on = [:id, :grp])` |
| Outer join            | `pd.merge(df1, df2, how = 'outer', on = ['id', 'grp'])` | `outerjoin(df1, df2, on = [:id, :grp])` |
| Left join             | `pd.merge(df1, df2, how = 'left', on = ['id', 'grp'])`  | `leftjoin(df1, df2, on = [:id, :grp])`  |
| Right join            | `pd.merge(df1, df2, how = 'right', on = ['id', 'grp'])` | `rightjoin(df1, df2, on = [:id, :grp])` |
| Semi join (filtering) | `df1[df1.id.isin(df2.id)]`                              | `semijoin(df1, df2, on = :id)`          |
| Anti join (filtering) | `df1[~df1.id.isin(df2.id)]`                             | `antijoin(df1, df2, on = :id)`          |

### Additional Differences

> 1. Pandas skips `NaN` values in analytic functions by default.  In Julia `NaN` is just a normal floating point value, and instead a special `missing` value is used to indicate missing data. DataFrames.jl respects general rules in Julia in propagating `missing` values by default.

Reviewer: It would be worth mentioning `skipmissing` and maybe showing an example.

2. Pandas keeps original column name after performing aggregation. DataFrames.jl appends a suffix automatically.

## Comparison with the R package dplyr

The following table compares the main functions of DataFrames.jl with the R package dplyr (version 1):

```R
df <- tibble(id = c('a','b','c','d','e','f'),

>         grp = c(1,2,1,2,1,2),

Reviewer: Align with previous row.

| Row slicing by location    | `df.iloc[1:3]`         | `df[2:3, :]`             |
| Column slicing by location | `df.iloc[:, 1:]`       | `df[:, 2:end]`           |
| Row indexing by label      | `df.loc['c']`          | `df[df.id .== 'c', :]`   |
| Column indexing by label   | `df.loc[:, 'x']`       | `df[:, :x]`              |
| Column slicing by label    | `df.loc[:, ['x','z']]` | `df[:, [:x, :z]]`        |
|                            | `df.loc[:, 'x':'z']`   | `df[:, Between(:x, :z)]` |
| Mixed indexing             | `df.loc['c'][1]`       | `df[df.id .== 'c', 2]`   |

Note that Julia uses 1-based indexing, inclusive on both ends. A special keyword `end` can be used to
indicate the last index.

### Common operations

| Operation                | pandas                                                | DataFrames.jl                                                 |
|:-------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------|
| Reduce multiple values   | `df['z'].mean(skipna = False)`                        | `combine(df, :z => mean)`                                     |

> |                          | `df['z'].mean()`                                      | `combine(df, :z => mean ∘ skipmissing => :z_mean)`            |

Reviewer 2: The python code is not the same. It is just `mean(df.z)` and `mean(skipmissing(df.z))`. What would be the same result as in Julia, i.e. `DataFrame` with column `z_mean`?

Author: That's a good question.  Python auto-collapses dimensions. When you aggregate several columns, it becomes a series with row index equals to the column name. When you aggregate a single column, it gives you a single number.

```python
>>> df['z'].mean(skipna = False)
nan
>>> df['z'].mean()
5.0
>>> df[['x', 'z']].mean()
x    3.5
z    5.0
```

Maybe we should have separate examples?
```julia
julia> mean(df.z)
missing

julia> mean(skipmissing(df.z))
5.0

julia> combine(df, [:x, :z] .=> mean)
1×2 DataFrame
│ Row │ x_mean  │ z_mean  │
│     │ Float64 │ Missing │
├─────┼─────────┼─────────┤
│ 1   │ 3.5     │ missing │
```
```julia
```

Reviewer 2: I am OK with choosing the examples you feel are most instructive given:
* the pandas and DataFrames.jl codes provide the same results (in terms of type and shape)
* we use DataFrames.jl functionality (i.e. I feel that showing `mean(df.z)` is unrelated to DataFrames.jl - it is a functionality of Statistics.jl)

Reviewer: And what does `df['z'].mean()` produce in pandas?

Author: pandas returns a single numeric value.  See examples above.

@bkamins I'm torn because I hope this page can give simple direction to pandas users for common use cases. If we stick to DataFrames-only verbs then we cannot give them the most logical way to solve the same problem. Pandas doesn't work the same way and does not map 1-to-1 to DataFrames.  Having said that, it seems reasonable to me to include something like `mean(df.z)`...

Reviewer: > pandas returns a single numeric value. See examples above.

Even with the double `[`?

Reviewer 2: >  it seems reasonable to me to include something like `mean(df.z)`

OK - let us have these, but maybe in a section like "things you can do just using Julia Base and standard library" (probably we need a better name) 😄, so that users are clear that they are not using the functionality of DataFrames.jl.

Reviewer 2: As a side note - so it is impossible to use a "piping" style in pandas like in e.g. dplyr? @pdeffebach will probably find it intrtesting 😄.

Reviewer 3: You can! you just stack the `.` calls over and over again as far as I understand. Perhaps it could be added.

Reviewer 2: I understand you are not - if at some point you stop being a data frame you cannot go back to be a data frame via chaining `.` because e.g. a vector does not have a method to make a data frame out of it.

Author: @nalimilan it's slightly different with double `[`. It returns a series with the column name as row index:

```
>>> df['z'].mean()
5.0
>>> df[['z']].mean()
z    5.0
dtype: float64
```

Author: OK. I like this idea and have update the pandas example. See latest commit.

|:-----------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------|
| Aggregate by groups          | `df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean().reset_index()`                                             | `combine(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean)`    |
| Aggregate and add columns    | `df.join(df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean(), on='grp', rsuffix='_mean')`                       | `transform(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean)`  |
| Aggregate and select columns | `df.join(df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean(), on='grp', rsuffix='_mean')[['grp','x_mean','y']]` | `select(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean, :y)` |

### More advanced commands

| Operation                 | pandas                                                                       | DataFrames.jl                                                 |
|:--------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Complex Function          | `df[['z']].agg(lambda v: np.mean(np.cos(v)))`                                | `combine(df, :z => (v -> mean(cos, skipmissing(v))))`         |

Reviewer 2: same here. Also one pair of `(` and `)` is not needed in Julia code

Author: Fixed, thanks.

|                           | `df['z'].mean()`                                                             | `combine(df, :z => (v -> mean(skipmissing(v))))` |

> | Transform several columns | `df.agg({'x': max, 'y': min})`                                               | `combine(df, :x => maximum, :y => minimum)`                   |

Reviewer 2: the result of the operation is different here

Reviewer 2: the same in the next example

Author: Are you OK with writing examples that does not exercise DataFrames features? Doing `mean(df.z)` is just a regular Julia function. I guess that's fine.... just pointing out the difference because pandas impose the same syntax with any number of columns as noted in the above comment.

Reviewer 2: But `df['z'].mean()` seems to me just a numpy functionality:
```
>>> np.array([1,2,3]).mean()
2.0
```
I think in this table we should focus on showing how functions from DataFrames.jl work (otherwise there is no precise borderline where to stop discussing functionalities of Base and standard library).

Author: > But df['z'].mean() seems to me just a numpy functionality

That's true but pandas is giving its users an easier way to write the code. Similarly, Julia Base/Statistics is giving the user an easier way for us to write `mean(df.z)`.

Reviewer: I'd say it's fine to document some essential features that are not strictly speaking provided by pandas, as long as it's only a few cases. Also, we could add a link to https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/noteworthy-differences/ to the Python and R sections.

Author: OK, I think it's best to just remove this particular example because this section should demonstrate how to work with complex functions, and this is definitely not going to be one. We already have another complex function example so that would be fine. Feel free to bring up more thoughts/suggestions.

|                           | `df.filter(regex=("^x")).mean()`                                             | `combine(df, r"^x" .=> mean)`                                 |
|                           | `df[['x', 'y']].agg([max, min])`                                             | `combine(df, ([:x, :y] .=> [maximum minimum])...)`            |
| Multivariate function     | `df.assign(x_y_cor = np.corrcoef(df.x, df.y)[0,1])`                          | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => cor)`                              |
| Row-wise                  | `df.assign(x_y_min = df.apply(lambda v: min(v.x, v.y), axis=1))`             | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => ByRow(min))`                       |
|                           | `df.assign(x_y_argmax = df.apply(lambda v: df.columns[v.argmax()], axis=1))` | `transform(df, AsTable([:x,:y]) => ByRow(argmax))`            |
| DataFrame as input        | `df.groupby('grp').head(2)`                                                  | `combine(d -> first(d, 2), groupby(df, :grp))`                |

> | DataFrame as output       | `df[['x']].agg(['max','min'])`                                               | `combine(:x => x -> (value = [minimum(x), maximum(x)],), df)` |

Reviewer 2: inconsistent order of rows

Author: I have fixed the order.

I just realized that this is probably not a good example. The pandas version is just aggregation but since it turns into series so the shape ends up looking like a data frame.

Author: Maybe it's ok:
```
>>> df[['x']].agg(['min','max'])
     x
min  1
max  6
```

vs.

```
julia> combine(:x => x -> (value = [minimum(x), maximum(x)],), df)
2×1 DataFrame
│ Row │ value │
│     │ Int64 │
├─────┼───────┤
│ 1   │ 1     │
│ 2   │ 6     │
```

### Joining data frames

| Operation             | pandas                                                  | DataFrames.jl                           |
|:----------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|
| Inner join            | `pd.merge(df1, df2, how = 'inner', on = ['id', 'grp'])` | `innerjoin(df1, df2, on = [:id, :grp])` |
| Outer join            | `pd.merge(df1, df2, how = 'outer', on = ['id', 'grp'])` | `outerjoin(df1, df2, on = [:id, :grp])` |
| Left join             | `pd.merge(df1, df2, how = 'left', on = ['id', 'grp'])`  | `leftjoin(df1, df2, on = [:id, :grp])`  |
| Right join            | `pd.merge(df1, df2, how = 'right', on = ['id', 'grp'])` | `rightjoin(df1, df2, on = [:id, :grp])` |
| Semi join (filtering) | `df1[df1.id.isin(df2.id)]`                              | `semijoin(df1, df2, on = :id)`          |

> | Anti join (filtering) | `df1[~df1.id.isin(df2.id)]`                             | `antijoin(df1, df2, on = :id)`          |

Reviewer 2: can we give an example using two keys - for consistency with the examples above?

Author: Let's keep it simple. I will change all the other examples to join on a single column to match.

# Comparisons

This section compares DataFrames.jl with other data manipulation frameworks in Python, R, and Stata.

A sample data set can be created using the following code:

```julia
df = DataFrame(id = 'a':'f', grp = repeat(1:2, 3), x = 6:-1:1, y = 4:9, z = [3:7; missing])

> df2 = DataFrame(grp = [1], w = [10])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
df2 = DataFrame(grp = 1, w = 10)
```

```

## Comparison with the Python package pandas

The following table compares the main functions of DataFrames.jl with the Python package pandas (version 1.1.0):

```python
>>> df = pandas.DataFrame({'grp': [1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2],
...                        'x': range(6, 0, -1),
...                        'y': range(4, 10),
...                        'z': [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, None]},
...                       index = list('abcdef'))
>>> df
   grp  x  y    z
a    1  6  4  3.0
b    2  5  5  4.0
c    1  4  6  5.0
d    2  3  7  6.0
e    1  2  8  7.0
f    2  1  9  NaN
```

> By comparison, this pandas data frame has `a` to `f` as row indices rather than a separate `id` column.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By comparison, this pandas data frame has `a` to `f` as row indices rather than a separate `id` column.
In the DataFrames.jl examples we use `findfirst` function as row index in pandas
in general allows duplicates and in such case a row corresponding to the first
occurrence of a value in the row index is returned.
In DataFrames.jl in general a `groupby` function should be used to set a row index
to a `DataFrame`; opposed to pandas it then returns all rows matching an index in
case of duplicates.
```

### Accessing data

| Operation                  | pandas                 | DataFrames.jl            |
|:---------------------------|:-----------------------|:-------------------------|
| Cell indexing by location  | `df.iloc[1, 1]`        | `df[2, 2]`               |
| Row slicing by location    | `df.iloc[1:3]`         | `df[2:3, :]`             |
| Column slicing by location | `df.iloc[:, 1:]`       | `df[:, 2:end]`           |

> | Row indexing by label      | `df.loc['c']`          | `df[df.id .== 'c', :]`   |

Reviewer 2: I think this is the equivalent:
```suggestion
| Row indexing by label      | `df.loc[['c']]`          | `df[df.id .== 'c', :]`   |
```

Reviewer 2: Actually checking this I have realized that pandas allows duplicate keys and finds only the first one - this is something that we would really not like to introduce in DataFrames.jl as at least I feel it is unsafe. I much prefer our `groupby` approach.

Author: The proposed syntax is more performant, right? The downside is that it looks longer and may be a turn-off for people who are just looking to switch over to Julia.

Reviewer: The proposed syntax also gives you a `DataFrameRow`, so it depends on what you want to do exactly. You could show both.

Reviewer 2: This is not the point. The proposed syntax is an equivalent of `df.loc['c']` in pandas. Unfortunately it is verbose, but it is only because `df.loc['c']` only appears to be simple and safe, and actually it is quite non-obvious what it does.

The equivalent of `df[df.id .== 'c', :]` in pandas is `df.iloc[df.index == 'c']`.

The fact that in this case the result was the same was only because `:id` has unique values. But in general it does not have to be this way (also pandas does not require key to be unique - and exactly as I have shown - in such case it does select the first value).

Author: Interesting observation that pandas isn't "type stable".  I changed the last index to 'e' (forcing a duplicate) and so this is how it works.
```
>>> df
   grp  x  y    z
a    1  6  4  3.0
b    2  5  5  4.0
c    1  4  6  5.0
d    2  3  7  6.0
e    1  2  8  7.0
e    2  1  9  NaN

>>> df.loc['c']
grp    1.0
x      4.0
y      6.0
z      5.0
Name: c, dtype: float64

>>> df.loc['e']
   grp  x  y    z
e    1  2  8  7.0
e    2  1  9  NaN
```

I agree that a DataFrameRow result matches better here.  Applying the suggestion...

Reviewer: Hmm, so actually none of the two syntaxes would be an exact replacement, right? I still think showing both could be useful.

| Column indexing by label   | `df.loc[:, 'x']`       | `df[:, :x]`              |
| Column slicing by label    | `df.loc[:, ['x','z']]` | `df[:, [:x, :z]]`        |
|                            | `df.loc[:, 'x':'z']`   | `df[:, Between(:x, :z)]` |

> | Mixed indexing             | `df.loc['c'][1]`       | `df[df.id .== 'c', 2]`   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Mixed indexing             | `df.loc['c'][1]`       | `df[findfirst(==('c'), df.id), 2]`   |
```

Reviewer: Is there a way in pandas to get a single-row data frame like `df[df.id .== 'c', 2]`? Could be worth showing both.

Note that Julia uses 1-based indexing, inclusive on both ends. A special keyword `end` can be used to
indicate the last index.

### Common operations

| Operation                | pandas                                                | DataFrames.jl                                      |
|:-------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|

> | Reduce multiple values   | `df[['z']].mean(skipna = False)`                      | `combine(df, :z => mean)`                          |

Reviewer 2: I am still not clear about it - you return `Series` in pandas not a `DataFrame`. If someone wants to drop a data frame in DataFrames.jl one should write `mean(df.z)` as discussed earlier. So:
1. I would here change it to `mean(df.z)` (also below)
2. Add another example that does not drop `DataFrame` in pandas (or comment that it is not possible if it is not possible) and give `combine(df, :z => mean)` example for DataFrames.jl

Author: Done! Please review latest commits.

# Comparisons

This section compares DataFrames.jl with other data manipulation frameworks in Python, R, and Stata.

A sample data set can be created using the following code:

```julia
df = DataFrame(id = 'a':'f', grp = repeat(1:2, 3), x = 6:-1:1, y = 4:9, z = [3:7; missing])
df2 = DataFrame(grp = 1, w = 10)
```

## Comparison with the Python package pandas

The following table compares the main functions of DataFrames.jl with the Python package pandas (version 1.1.0):

```python
df = pandas.DataFrame({'grp': [1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2],
                       'x': range(6, 0, -1),
                       'y': range(4, 10),
                       'z': [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, None]},
                      index = list('abcdef'))

>>> df
   grp  x  y    z
a    1  6  4  3.0
b    2  5  5  4.0
c    1  4  6  5.0
d    2  3  7  6.0
e    1  2  8  7.0
f    2  1  9  NaN
```

By comparison, this pandas data frame has `a` to `f` as row indices rather than a separate `id` column.

> In the DataFrames.jl examples we use `findfirst` function as row index in pandas
> in general allows duplicates and in such case a row corresponding to the first
> occurrence of a value in the row index is returned.
> In DataFrames.jl in general a `groupby` function should be used to set a row index
> to a `DataFrame`; opposed to pandas it then returns all rows matching an index in
> case of duplicates.

Reviewer: My favorite hobby is to switch "a" and "the" in @bkamins's texts. :-p
```suggestion
In the DataFrames.jl examples we use the `findfirst` function, since row index in pandas
in general allows duplicates and in such case the row corresponding to the first
occurrence of the value in the row index is returned.
In DataFrames.jl in general the `groupby` function should be used to set a row index
to a `DataFrame`; contrary to pandas it then returns all rows matching an index in
case of duplicates.
```
But more seriously, is it right that only the first row is returned when there are duplicates, given what you showed in the other thread?

Author: I haven't paid much attention about the duplicates before. Now, I just did an exercise with the last row's id changed to an 'e'.  Here're the findings for the cases 1) row indexing by label and 2) mixed indexing:

pandas:
```
>>> df
   grp  x  y    z
a    1  6  4  3.0
b    2  5  5  4.0
c    1  4  6  5.0
d    2  3  7  6.0
e    1  2  8  7.0
e    2  1  9  NaN
>>> df.loc['e']
   grp  x  y    z
e    1  2  8  7.0
e    2  1  9  NaN
>>> df.loc['e'][1]
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/home/ec2-user/miniconda3/envs/pandas/lib/python3.8/site-packages/pandas/core/indexes/base.py", line 2889, in get_loc
    return self._engine.get_loc(casted_key)
  File "pandas/_libs/index.pyx", line 70, in pandas._libs.index.IndexEngine.get_loc
  File "pandas/_libs/index.pyx", line 97, in pandas._libs.index.IndexEngine.get_loc
  File "pandas/_libs/hashtable_class_helper.pxi", line 1675, in pandas._libs.hashtable.PyObjectHashTable.get_item
  File "pandas/_libs/hashtable_class_helper.pxi", line 1683, in pandas._libs.hashtable.PyObjectHashTable.get_item
KeyError: 1
```

Two observations:
1. The row indexing by label example returns a data frame with all rows that matched the label.
2. The mixed indexing example is "unsafe" as the return type is unstable.

Now, compare to this Julia code, which always returns a DataFrameRow.
```
df[findfirst(==('c'), df.id), :]
```

I would like to propose two changes from here:

1) Move this paragraph to the section under "Accessing data" after the note about 1-based indexing.

2) Rewrite it again as follows. I want to focus on the Julia solution more than explaining what pandas does.

In the DataFrames.jl examples, the `findfirst` function is used to find the first match and return the result
as a single DataFrameRow object. In the case that `id` is not unique, you can use the `findall` function 
instead, and it would return a DataFrame object having all matched rows.

Author: BTW, I also did a little benchmarking comparing `findall` vs `groupby`, and I found `findall` performs better. That's why I am suggesting that in the above text. Please let me know if I miss anything.

```
julia> df2 = DataFrame(id=rand('a':'e', 10000), grp=1:10000, x=1:10000);

julia> foo1(df) = df[findall(==('e'), df.id), :];

julia> foo2(df) = groupby(df, :id)[('e',)];

julia> @btime foo1($df2);
  62.421 μs (27 allocations: 73.41 KiB)

julia> @btime foo2($df2);
  109.985 μs (50 allocations: 381.58 KiB)
```

Reviewer 2: > My favorite hobby is to switch "a" and "the" in @bkamins's texts.

I should start reporting in Julia surveys that I consider myself a member of an underrepresented community of people whose native language does not have articles :smile:.

Reviewer 2: @tk3369 `groupby` is supposed to be slower than `findall` if you do only one operation. `groupby` is for cases when you do it once and then do lookup many times.

Reviewer 2: Now - you are right and my suggestion was wrong. I do not know why my previous test has shown that only the first occurrence. Indeed pandas returns all occurrences, but with the distinction that if there is only one then it drops a data frame. So my suggestion is wrong and should not be applied.

Reviewer 2: regarding noting `findall(==('c'), df.col)` vs `df.col .== 'c'` I think both are OK, but probably the latter is easier to write.

Author: Thanks. I have now applied the change. Please review the latest commit.

| Column slicing by location | `df.iloc[:, 1:]`       | `df[:, 2:end]`                     |
| Row indexing by label      | `df.loc['c']`          | `df[findfirst(==('c'), df.id), :]` |
| Column indexing by label   | `df.loc[:, 'x']`       | `df[:, :x]`                        |
| Column slicing by label    | `df.loc[:, ['x','z']]` | `df[:, [:x, :z]]`                  |
|                            | `df.loc[:, 'x':'z']`   | `df[:, Between(:x, :z)]`           |
| Mixed indexing             | `df.loc['c'][1]`       | `df[findfirst(==('c'), df.id), 2]` |

Note that Julia uses 1-based indexing, inclusive on both ends. A special keyword `end` can be used to
indicate the last index.

In the DataFrames.jl examples, the `findfirst` function is used to find the first match and return the result
as a single `DataFrameRow` object. In the case that `id` is not unique, you can use the `findall` function
or boolean indexing instead. It would then return a `DataFrame` object containing all matched rows. The following
two lines of code are functionally equivalent:

```julia
df[findfirst(==('c'), df.id), :]
df[df.id .== 'c', :]
```

> ### Common operations

Reviewer 2: I would add this sentence, as this is a point of the discussion why `findfirst` and `findall` are distinct:
```suggestion
Note that this differs from `df.loc['c']` behaviour in pandas which
returns a `Series` object if there is exactly one `'c'` value in the index,
and a `DataFrame` object if there are multiple occurrences of `'c'` in it.

### Common operations
```

Author: Done. See latest commit.

| Add new columns          | `df.assign(x_mean = df['x'].mean())`                  | `transform(df, :x => mean => :x_mean)`  |
| Rename columns           | `df.rename(columns = {'x': 'x_new'})`                 | `rename(df, :x => :x_new)`              |
| Pick & transform columns | `df.assign(x_mean = df['x'].mean())[['x_mean', 'y']]` | `select(df, :x => mean, :y)`            |
| Sort rows                | `df.sort_values(by = ['x'])`                          | `sort(df, :x)`                          |

Note that Julia propagates `missing` data by default for safety reasons. The `skipmissing` function
can be used to remove missing data. See more details at the [Additional Differences](@ref) section below.

### Grouping data and aggregation

| Operation                    | pandas                                                                                    | DataFrames.jl                               |
| :--------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------ |

> | Aggregate by groups          | `df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean().reset_index()`                                             | `combine(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean)`    |

Reviewer 2: in pandas the resulting column has name `x`, while in DataFrames.jl it has name `x_mean`. I would add examples how to get both results. Then the first one would be:

```suggestion
| Aggregate by groups          | `df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean().reset_index()`                                             | `combine(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean => :x)`    |
```

I do not know pandas enough to say how to get the second one (i.e. rename column to `x_mean` in the process). Could you please suggest this? Thank you!

Author: When I went through these examples, I realized that pandas and DataFrames are quite different. The default of column naming after aggregation is one of them. Because these differences are everywhere, I think it would be better to focus on what actually gets done rather than making them match exactly. Otherwise, it will uglify either the pandas syntax or the DataFrames syntax.

The remedy is to point out these differences explicitly. This particular issue is explained in the 2nd note under "Additional Difference" section. Maybe that's too "far away". I can move that note to be directly under this section.

| Aggregate and add columns    | `df.join(df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean(), on='grp', rsuffix='_mean')`                       | `transform(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean)`  |
| Aggregate and select columns | `df.join(df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean(), on='grp', rsuffix='_mean')[['grp','x_mean','y']]` | `select(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean, :y)` |

### More advanced commands

| Operation                 | pandas                                                                       | DataFrames.jl                                                 |
| :------------------------ | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | Complex Function          | `df[['z']].agg(lambda v: np.mean(np.cos(v)))`                                | `combine(df, :z => v -> mean(cos, skipmissing(v)))`           |

Reviewer 2: The pandas code here drops the data frame, so in data frames it would be `mean(cos.(skipmissing(df.z)))` - but then I am not sure we need to show it as we have a similar example above. If we want to keep showing it it would be good to give an example that retains the object being a `DataFrames` there

Author: Well, to calculate a single value then these are equivalent:

```
>>> np.mean(np.cos(df.z))
0.07081972179856785
```

```
julia> mean(cos.(skipmissing(df.z)))
0.07081972179856785
```

But then it's not a "Complex Function" anymore. If I understand the purpose of this operation properly, we want illustrate how to apply a custom function (other than the regular `min`, `mean`, etc.) when aggregating a data frame.

As related to my other note, do we want to make the result match exactly?  I would rather not. In pandas, I can convert a `Series` to a `DataFrame` and then transpose it to come up with the same shape as in DataFrames.jl. And then if the column name needs to be adjusted then you have a 100-char code that is so obfuscated that people wouldn't even understand.

Having said these, I think it's better to keep it as-is. Let me know if you agree, and if not, would you mind suggesting another viable solution?

> | Transform several columns | `df.agg({'x': max, 'y': min})`                                               | `combine(df, :x => maximum, :y => minimum)`                   |

Reviewer 2: same here, the equivalent of what you write in pandas now in DataFrames.jl would be `[maximum(df.x), minimum(df.y)]`.

Author: Actually, `[maximum(df.x), minimum(df.y)]` isn't the same because the information about the column names are missing in the result. In pandas, the row index contains the column being aggregated:

```
>>> df.agg({'x': max, 'y': min})
x    6
y    4
dtype: int64
```

> |                           | `df[['x','y']].mean()`                                                       | `combine(df, [:x, :y] .=> mean)`                              |

Reviewer 2: same here - pandas does drop `DataFrame` so it is a different operation. In DataFrames.jl this would be `mean.([df.x, df.y])`.

Author: Not really the same. See above note  https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/pull/2378#discussion_r479791671

> |                           | `df.filter(regex=("^x")).mean()`                                             | `combine(df, r"^x" .=> mean)`                                 |

Reviewer 2: same here

Author: See my reply above...

> |                           | `df[['x', 'y']].agg([max, min])`                                             | `combine(df, ([:x, :y] .=> [maximum minimum])...)`            |

Reviewer 2: same here, look at pandas output:
```
>>> df[['x', 'y']].agg([max, min])
     x  y
max  6  9
min  1  4
```
vs DataFrames.jl output:
```
julia> combine(df, ([:x, :y] .=> [maximum minimum])...)
1×4 DataFrame
│ Row │ x_maximum │ y_maximum │ x_minimum │ y_minimum │
│     │ Int64     │ Int64     │ Int64     │ Int64     │
├─────┼───────────┼───────────┼───────────┼───────────┤
│ 1   │ 6         │ 9         │ 1         │ 4         │
```

Author: It seems to be quite complex to arrive at the same result. Maybe a missing feature in DataFrames.jl?

```
julia> @pipe combine(df, ([:x, :y] .=> [maximum minimum])...) |>
           stack(_, All()) |>
           transform(_, :variable => ByRow(x -> split(get(x), "_")[2]) => :measure) |> 
           transform(_, :variable => ByRow(x -> split(get(x), "_")[1]) => :column) |>
           select(_, Not(:variable)) |>
           unstack(_, :column, :value)
2×3 DataFrame
│ Row │ measure  │ x      │ y      │
│     │ SubStri… │ Int64? │ Int64? │
├─────┼──────────┼────────┼────────┤
│ 1   │ maximum  │ 6      │ 9      │
│ 2   │ minimum  │ 1      │ 4      │
```

or 
```
julia> vcat(
         transform(
           combine(df, :x => minimum => :x, :y => minimum => :y),
                   1 => (x->"min") => :op),
         transform(
           combine(df, :x => maximum => :x, :y => maximum => :y),
                          1 => (x->"max") => :op))
2×3 DataFrame
│ Row │ x     │ y     │ op     │
│     │ Int64 │ Int64 │ String │
├─────┼───────┼───────┼────────┤
│ 1   │ 1     │ 4     │ min    │
│ 2   │ 6     │ 9     │ max    │
```

I think we have two options here:
1. Remove the example altogether
2. Add another note about the difference in shapes

I favor option 2. Please let me know what you think.  Thanks

| Multivariate function     | `df.assign(x_y_cor = np.corrcoef(df.x, df.y)[0,1])`                          | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => cor)`                              |
| Row-wise                  | `df.assign(x_y_min = df.apply(lambda v: min(v.x, v.y), axis=1))`             | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => ByRow(min))`                       |
|                           | `df.assign(x_y_argmax = df.apply(lambda v: df.columns[v.argmax()], axis=1))` | `transform(df, AsTable([:x,:y]) => ByRow(argmax))`            |

> | DataFrame as input        | `df.groupby('grp').head(2)`                                                  | `combine(d -> first(d, 2), groupby(df, :grp))`                |

Reviewer 2: results have a different order of rows (maybe make a note of it if it is not possible to make it the same?)

Author: Added note. See latest commit.

> | DataFrame as output       | `df[['x']].agg(['min','max'])`                                               | `combine(:x => x -> (value = [minimum(x), maximum(x)],), df)` |

Reviewer 2: the point of this example was to name the output column `value`. How to achieve it in pandas?

Author: Looking at it again, they are not the same because pandas contains both the original column name as well as the aggregation function (as row index):

```
>>> df[['x']].agg(['min','max'])
     x
min  1
max  6
```

DataFrames gives
```
julia> combine(:x => x -> (x = [minimum(x), maximum(x)],), df)
2×1 DataFrame
│ Row │ value │
│     │ Int64 │
├─────┼───────┤
│ 1   │ 1     │
│ 2   │ 6     │
```

To achieve the same result in pandas, one can write:
```
>>> df[['x']].agg(lambda x: [min(x), max(x)])
   x
0  1
1  6
```

We can easily match the column name in the DataFrames.jl version. I can fix that now.

Author: Updated.  See latest commit.

### Joining data frames

Suppose that you have a second data frame as shown below:
```
df2 = pandas.DataFrame({'grp': [1], 'w': [10]})

>>> df2
   grp   w
0    1  10
```

Here is how to join the data frames:

| Operation             | pandas                                         | DataFrames.jl                   |
| :-------------------- | :--------------------------------------------- | :------------------------------ |
| Inner join            | `pd.merge(df, df2, how = 'inner', on = 'grp')` | `innerjoin(df, df2, on = :grp)` |
| Outer join            | `pd.merge(df, df2, how = 'outer', on = 'grp')` | `outerjoin(df, df2, on = :grp)` |
| Left join             | `pd.merge(df, df2, how = 'left', on = 'grp')`  | `leftjoin(df, df2, on = :grp)`  |
| Right join            | `pd.merge(df, df2, how = 'right', on = 'grp')` | `rightjoin(df, df2, on = :grp)` |
| Semi join (filtering) | `df[df.grp.isin(df2.grp)]`                     | `semijoin(df, df2, on = :grp)`  |

> | Anti join (filtering) | `df[~df.grp.isin(df2.grp)]`                    | `antijoin(df, df2, on = :grp)`  |

Reviewer 2: I think these two examples are misleading, as they seem to only work for one column when you do a join in pandas. How to make it work for multiple columns you would want to group by?

Author: This is where DataFrames.jl shines as it's quite ugly in pandas 🤯 

```
>>> df
   grp  x  y    z
a    1  6  4  3.0
b    2  5  5  4.0
c    1  4  6  5.0
d    2  3  7  6.0
e    1  2  8  7.0
f    2  1  9  NaN
>>> df2
   grp  x   w
0    1  6  10
>>> df[df[['grp','x']].agg(tuple,1).isin(df2[['grp','x']].agg(tuple,1))]
   grp  x  y    z
a    1  6  4  3.0
```

I reckon that this is not a very common join operation after searching on Stack Overflow. What do you think of this commit https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/pull/2378/commits/a73e8981c3884f1ba8b536d62ded47f7c6b530d6 ?

Reviewer 2: OK - we can leave it as is.

### Additional Differences

1. Pandas skips `NaN` values in analytic functions by default. In Julia `NaN` is just a normal floating point value, and instead a special `missing` value is used to indicate missing data. DataFrames.jl respects general rules in Julia in propagating `missing` values by default.

> 2. Pandas keeps original column name after performing an analytic function. DataFrames.jl appends a suffix to the column name by default.

Reviewer 2: agreed - still we should then give one example how to achieve the non-default results in both frameworks as commented above.

Author: Added new example. Please review this commit  https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/pull/2378/commits/4cf28eccc5a542d93f2c8e3c53c19eeb69c4c52a.

|                           | `df[['x', 'y']].agg([max, min])`                                             | `combine(df, ([:x, :y] .=> [maximum minimum])...)`        |
| Multivariate function     | `df.assign(x_y_cor = np.corrcoef(df.x, df.y)[0,1])`                          | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => cor)`                          |
| Row-wise                  | `df.assign(x_y_min = df.apply(lambda v: min(v.x, v.y), axis=1))`             | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => ByRow(min))`                   |
|                           | `df.assign(x_y_argmax = df.apply(lambda v: df.columns[v.argmax()], axis=1))` | `transform(df, AsTable([:x,:y]) => ByRow(argmax))`        |
| DataFrame as input        | `df.groupby('grp').head(2)`                                                  | `combine(d -> first(d, 2), groupby(df, :grp))`            |
| DataFrame as output       | `df[['x']].agg(lambda x: [min(x), max(x)])`                                  | `combine(:x => x -> (x = [minimum(x), maximum(x)],), df)` |

Note that pandas preserves the same row order after `groupby` whereas DataFrames.jl

> reorders the result according to the grouped keys.

Reviewer: Note that we don't lose the row order, but since we present rows by group we have to reorder them:
```suggestion
shows them grouped by the provided keys.
```

two lines of code are functionally equivalent:

```julia
df[findall(==('c'), df.id), :]
df[df.id .== 'c', :]
```

DataFrames.jl's indexing always produces a consistent and predictable return type.
By contrast, pandas' `loc` function returns a `Series` object when there is exactly
one `'c'` value in the index, and it returns a `DataFrame` object when there are multiple
rows having the index value of `'c'`.

### Common operations

| Operation                | pandas                                                         | DataFrames.jl                               |
|--------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Reduce multiple values   | `df['z'].mean(skipna = False)`                                 | `mean(df.z)`                                |
|                          | `df['z'].mean()`                                               | `mean(skipmissing(df.z))`                   |
|                          | `df[['z']].agg(['mean'])`                                      | `combine(df, :z => mean ∘ skipmissing)`     |

> | Add new columns          | `df.assign(z1 = df['z'] + 1)`                                  | `transform(df, :z => (v -> v .+ 1) => :z1)` |

Reviewer 2: I would show three options here as `transform` in this case is actually a most complex one:
```suggestion
| Add new columns          | `df.assign(z1 = df['z'] + 1)`                                  | `df.z1 = df.z .+ 1`                         |
|                          |                                                                | `insertcols!(df, :x1 => df.z .+ 1)`         |
|                          |                                                                | `transform(df, :z => (v -> v .+ 1) => :z1)` |
```

Author: Done with minor edit (using `:z1` rather than `:x1` for `insertcols!`). See commit https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/pull/2378/commits/32b36b33531defe4af1f9fcdebbce7681899b1c8

| Rename columns           | `df.rename(columns = {'x': 'x_new'})`                          | `rename(df, :x => :x_new)`                  |
| Pick & transform columns | `df.assign(x_mean = df['x'].mean())[['x_mean', 'y']]`          | `select(df, :x => mean, :y)`                |
| Sort rows                | `df.sort_values(by = 'x')`                                     | `sort(df, :x)`                              |
|                          | `df.sort_values(by = ['grp', 'x'], ascending = [True, False])` | `sort(df, [:grp, order(:x, rev = true)])`   |

Note that pandas skips `NaN` values in its analytic functions by default. By contrast,

> Julia functions do not skip `NaN`'s for safety reasons. If necessary, you can filter out

Reviewer 2: it is more a performance consideration. I would just skip giving the reason
```suggestion
Julia functions do not skip `NaN`'s. If necessary, you can filter out
```

> the `NaN`'s before processing, for example, `mean(Iterators.filter(!isnan, x))`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `NaN`'s before processing, for example, `mean(Iterators.filter(!isnan, x))`.
```

Pandas uses `NaN` for representing both missing data and the floating point "not a number" value.
Julia defines a special value `missing` for representing missing data. DataFrames.jl respects
general rules in Julia in propagating `missing` values by default. If necessary,
the `skipmissing` function can be used to remove missing data.
See the [Missing Data](@ref) section for more information.

In addition, pandas keeps the original column name after applying a function.
DataFrames.jl appends a suffix to the column name by default. To keep it simple, the

> examples above do not synchronize the column names between pandas and DataFrames.jl.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
examples above do not synchronize the column names between pandas and DataFrames.jl
(you can pass `renamecols=false` keyword argument to `select`, `transform` and
`combine` functions to retain old column names).
```

| Rename column after aggregation | `df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean().rename("my_mean")`                                     | `combine(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean => :my_mean)` |
| Add aggregated data as column   | `df.join(df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean(), on='grp', rsuffix='_mean')`                   | `transform(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean)`           |
| ...and select output columns    | `df.join(df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean(), on='grp', rsuffix='_mean')[['grp','x_mean']]` | `select(groupby(df, :grp), :id, :x => mean)`         |

Note that pandas returns a `Series` object for 1-dimensional result unless `reset_index` is called afterwards.
The corresponding DataFrames.jl examples return an equivalent `DataFrame` object.
Consider the first example:

```python
>>> df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean()
grp
1    4
2    3
Name: x, dtype: int64
```

For DataFrames.jl, it looks like this:

```julia
julia> combine(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean)
2×2 DataFrame
│ Row │ grp   │ x_mean  │
│     │ Int64 │ Float64 │
├─────┼───────┼─────────┤
│ 1   │ 1     │ 4.0     │
│ 2   │ 2     │ 3.0     │
```

> In DataFrames.jl, the `GroupedDataFrame` object that contains a dictionary for efficient key lookups.

Reviewer 2: The fact that we use a `Dict` internally is an implementation detail that might change:
```suggestion
In DataFrames.jl, the `GroupedDataFrame` object supports an efficient key lookup.
```

|                                        | `df.filter(regex=("^x")).mean()`                                             | `combine(df, names(df, r"^x") .=> mean)`                  |
| Apply function over multiple variables | `df.assign(x_y_cor = np.corrcoef(df.x, df.y)[0,1])`                          | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => cor)`                          |
| Row-wise operation                     | `df.assign(x_y_min = df.apply(lambda v: min(v.x, v.y), axis=1))`             | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => ByRow(min))`                   |
|                                        | `df.assign(x_y_argmax = df.apply(lambda v: df.columns[v.argmax()], axis=1))` | `transform(df, AsTable([:x,:y]) => ByRow(argmax))`        |
| DataFrame as input                     | `df.groupby('grp').head(2)`                                                  | `combine(d -> first(d, 2), groupby(df, :grp))`            |
| DataFrame as output                    | `df[['x']].agg(lambda x: [min(x), max(x)])`                                  | `combine(:x => x -> (x = [minimum(x), maximum(x)],), df)` |

Note that pandas preserves the same row order after `groupby` whereas DataFrames.jl

> shows them grouped by the provided keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
shows them grouped by the provided keys after the `combine` operation,
but `select` and `transform` retain an original row ordering.
```

### Joining data frames

DataFrames.jl supports join operations similar to a relational database.

| Operation             | pandas                                         | DataFrames.jl                   |
| :-------------------- | :--------------------------------------------- | :------------------------------ |
| Inner join            | `pd.merge(df, df2, how = 'inner', on = 'grp')` | `innerjoin(df, df2, on = :grp)` |
| Outer join            | `pd.merge(df, df2, how = 'outer', on = 'grp')` | `outerjoin(df, df2, on = :grp)` |
| Left join             | `pd.merge(df, df2, how = 'left', on = 'grp')`  | `leftjoin(df, df2, on = :grp)`  |
| Right join            | `pd.merge(df, df2, how = 'right', on = 'grp')` | `rightjoin(df, df2, on = :grp)` |
| Semi join (filtering) | `df[df.grp.isin(df2.grp)]`                     | `semijoin(df, df2, on = :grp)`  |
| Anti join (filtering) | `df[~df.grp.isin(df2.grp)]`                    | `antijoin(df, df2, on = :grp)`  |

For multi-column joins, both pandas and DataFrames.jl accept an array for the `on` keyword argument.

> In the cases of semi joins and anti joins, pandas' `isin` function can still be used as long as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the cases of semi joins and anti joins, `isin` function in pandas can still be used as long as
```

Author: Done. See commit  https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/pull/2378/commits/f6edd648483e4e5b0ba81dc08c60215add074f35

The table below compares more advanced commands:

| Operations                | pandas                                                                       | DataFrames.jl                                                |
|:--------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------|
| Complex Function          | `df[['x']].agg(lambda v: np.mean(np.cos(v)))`                                | `combine(df, :x => (x -> mean(cos, x)) => :x_mean)`          |
| Transform several columns | `df.agg({'x': max, 'y': min})`                                               | `combine(df, :x => maximum, :y => minimum)`                  |
|                           | `df[['x','y']].mean()`                                                       | `combine(df, [:x, :y] .=> mean)`                             |
|                           | `df.filter(regex=("^x")).mean()`                                             | `combine(df, r"^x" .=> mean)`                                |

> |                           | `df[['x', 'y']].agg([max, min]`                                              | `combine(df, ([:x, :y] .=> [maximum minimum])...)`           |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|                           | `df[['x', 'y']].agg([max, min])`                                             | `combine(df, ([:x, :y] .=> [maximum minimum])...)`           |
```

| Multivariate function     | `df.assign(x_y_cor = np.corrcoef(df.x, df.y)[0,1])`                          | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => cor)`                             |
| Row-wise                  | `df.assign(x_y_min = df.apply(lambda v: min(v.x, v.y), axis=1))`             | `transform(df, [:x, :y] => ByRow(min))`                      |
|                           | `df.assign(x_y_argmax = df.apply(lambda v: df.columns[v.argmax()], axis=1))` | `transform(df, AsTable([:x,:y]) => ByRow(argmax))`           |
| DataFrame as input        | `df.groupby('id').head(2)`                                                   | `combine(d -> first(d, 2), groupby(df, :id))`                |

> | DataFrame as output       | `df[['x']].agg(['max','min'])`                                               | `combine(:x => x -> (value = [minimum(x), maximum(x)]), df)` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| DataFrame as output       | `df[['x']].agg(['max','min'])`                                               | `combine(:x => x -> (value = [minimum(x), maximum(x)],), df)` |
```

Reviewer 2: The same typo is in `dplyr` - can you please correct it. Also for pandas can you please set output column name to `value`?

Notes:

> 1. Pandas skips `NaN` values in analytic functions by default. DataFrames.jl respects general rules in Julia in propagating missing values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Pandas skips `NaN` values in analytic functions by default.
   In Julia `NaN` is just a normal floating point value, and instead
   a special `missing` value is used to indicate missing data.
   DataFrames.jl respects general rules in Julia in propagating `missing` values by default.
```

2. Pandas keeps original column name after performing aggregation. DataFrames.jl appends a suffix automatically.

> 3. DataFrames.jl currently does not support row indices.

Reviewer 2: actually maybe show in a separate table a comparison how to filter a data frame by row index either using `filter` or a group index after `groupby` is done?

This section compares DataFrames.jl with other data manipulation frameworks.

A sample data set can be created using the following code:

```julia
df = DataFrame(id = 'a':'f', grp = [1,2,1,2,1,2], x = 6:-1:1, y = 4:9, z = 3:8)
```

## Comparison with the Python package pandas

The following table compares the main functions of DataFrames.jl with the Python package pandas (version 1.1.0):

```python
df = pd.DataFrame(
        {'grp': [1,2,1,2,1,2], 'x': range(6,0,-1), 'y': range(4,10), 'z': range(3,9)},
        index = list('abcdef'))
```

Note that pandas allows row indexing by labels. For DataFrames.jl, you can achieve the same result via row filtering as shown below.

How to access data:

> | Operation                  | Example                     | pandas                 | DataFrames.jl                                              |

Reviewer 2: Why do you add "Example" column only here?

Author: I want to see if you like it :-)  I thought it's easier to understand the sample code. I can add the same column for other tables including dplyr/stata later today.

Reviewer 2: Let us wait for @nalimilan to comment on this. I was afraid that for transformations the descriptions would be overly long.

Author: I just generated the docs and checked from a browser.  It doesn't look at great because the current style limits the width of the content and so the text starts wrapping. Perhaps it's not a good idea after all. Here's how they look:

1) With the Example column

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1159782/91144570-14044480-e669-11ea-9924-e72210f6afaf.png)

2) Without the Example column

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1159782/91144588-1a92bc00-e669-11ea-9498-fd3ed25ffd2b.png)

Reviewer: Yeah, making the table too wide isn't great. I think we can assume people understand the pandas code, otherwise they shouldn't read the table. :-)

This section compares DataFrames.jl with other data manipulation frameworks.

A sample data set can be created using the following code:

```julia
df = DataFrame(id = 'a':'f', grp = [1,2,1,2,1,2], x = 6:-1:1, y = 4:9, z = 3:8)
```

## Comparison with the Python package pandas

The following table compares the main functions of DataFrames.jl with the Python package pandas (version 1.1.0):

```python
df = pd.DataFrame(
        {'grp': [1,2,1,2,1,2], 'x': range(6,0,-1), 'y': range(4,10), 'z': range(3,9)},
        index = list('abcdef'))
```

Note that pandas allows row indexing by labels. For DataFrames.jl, you can achieve the same result via row filtering as shown below.

How to access data:

| Operation                  | Example                     | pandas                 | DataFrames.jl                                              |
|:---------------------------|:----------------------------|:-----------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------|

> | Cell indexing by location  | Cell at row 2, column 2     | `df.iloc[1,1]`         | `df[2,2]` (1-based index)*                                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Cell indexing by location  | Cell at row 2, column 2     | `df.iloc[1, 1]`        | `df[2, 2]` (1-based index)*                                 |
```

| Row slicing by location    | Rows 2 and 3                | `df.iloc[1:3]`         | `df[2:3, :]`                                               |
| Column slicing by location | Column 2 and after          | `df.iloc[:, 1:]`       | `df[:, 2:end]`*                                            |
| Row indexing by label      | Row 'c'                     | `df.loc['c']`          | `df[df.id .== 'c', :]`                                     |
| Column indexing by label   | Column 'x'                  | `df.loc[:, 'x']`       | `df[:, :x]`                                                |

> | Column slicing by label    | Columns 'x' and 'z'         | `df.loc[:, ['x','z']]` | `df[:, [:x, :z]]`  of `select(df, [:x, :y])`               |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Column slicing by label    | Columns 'x' and 'z'         | `df.loc[:, ['x','z']]` | `df[:, [:x, :z]]`  or `select(df, [:x, :y])`               |
```

```python
df = pd.DataFrame(

>         {'grp': [1,2,1,2,1,2], 'x': range(6,0,-1), 'y': range(4,10), 'z': [3,4,5,6,7,None]},

Reviewer 2: is it `None`or `NaN` in pandas (I am not an expert here)

Author: It converts to NaN on the way in: 
```python
>>> df = pd.DataFrame(
...         {'grp': [1,2,1,2,1,2], 'x': range(6,0,-1), 'y': range(4,10), 'z': [3,4,5,6,7,None]},
...         index = list('abcdef'))
>>> df
   grp  x  y    z
a    1  6  4  3.0
b    2  5  5  4.0
c    1  4  6  5.0
d    2  3  7  6.0
e    1  2  8  7.0
f    2  1  9  NaN
```

Alternatively, we could use `np.nan` instead if numpy is imported: 
```python
df = pd.DataFrame(
        {'grp': [1,2,1,2,1,2], 'x': range(6,0,-1), 'y': range(4,10), 'z': [3,4,5,6,7,np.nan]},
        index = list('abcdef'))
```

Maybe we should add the imports:
```python
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
```

Any preference?

Reviewer 2: Then I think it is ok to stay with `None`.

Author: OK, I have just put back `None` (was accidentally committed earlier). I have also re-indented the pandas code.

Note that pandas allows row indexing by labels. For DataFrames.jl, you can achieve the same result via row filtering as shown below.

### Accessing data

> | Operation                  | Example                     | pandas                 | DataFrames.jl            |

Reviewer 2: maybe instead of "Example" column just add this in "Operation" column in parenthesis (this way we can flexibly decide where it makes sense to add a comment and when we can omit it). What do you think?

Reviewer: Worth trying, yes!

Author: I'm now more inclined to delete the `Example` column since the audience would be pandas users and they should know it really well already.

Reviewer 2: OK - let us delete this column

Reviewer: Column is still here?

Author: 👻 ! It's gone now 😄

                   index = list('abcdef'))
```

Because pandas supports multi-index, this example data frame is set up with `a` to `f`
as row indices rather than a separate `id` column.

### Accessing data

| Operation                  | pandas                 | DataFrames.jl                      |
|----------------------------|------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Cell indexing by location  | `df.iloc[1, 1]`        | `df[2, 2]`                         |
| Row slicing by location    | `df.iloc[1:3]`         | `df[2:3, :]`                       |
| Column slicing by location | `df.iloc[:, 1:]`       | `df[:, 2:end]`                     |
| Row indexing by label      | `df.loc['c']`          | `df[findfirst(==('c'), df.id), :]` |
| Column indexing by label   | `df.loc[:, 'x']`       | `df[:, [:id, :x]`                  |
| Column slicing by label    | `df.loc[:, ['x','z']]` | `df[:, [:id, :x, :z]]`             |

> |                            | `df.loc[:, 'x':'z']`   | `select(df, :id, Between(:x, :z))` |

Reviewer: I think I'd show both syntaxes, with and without `:id` (one per line). Otherwise we don't show how to extract a single column when you don't want labels, which is an essential feature and that users may be surprised not to see.

Author: Yeah, I felt this is a little odd as well here. Maybe it's better to break our rule and let go the label in this case. 

I will remove the following note as well.  Saying more about this will probably add more confusion to the reader.
> The DataFrames.jl examples for column indexing include the `id` column so that the result matches pandas' as they appear as row indices there.

| Mixed indexing             | `df.loc['c'][1]`       | `df[findfirst(==('c'), df.id), 2]` |

Note that Julia uses 1-based indexing, inclusive on both ends. A special keyword `end` can be used to
indicate the last index.

> The DataFrames.jl examples for column indexing include the `id` column by design

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DataFrames.jl examples for column indexing include the `id` column
```

| Rename columns           | `df.rename(columns = {'x': 'x_new'})`                          | `rename(df, :x => :x_new)`                  |
| Pick & transform columns | `df.assign(x_mean = df['x'].mean())[['x_mean', 'y']]`          | `select(df, :x => mean, :y)`                |
| Sort rows                | `df.sort_values(by = 'x')`                                     | `sort(df, :x)`                              |
|                          | `df.sort_values(by = ['grp', 'x'], ascending = [True, False])` | `sort(df, [:grp, order(:x, rev = true)])`   |

Note that pandas skips `NaN` values in its analytic functions by default. By constrast,
Julia functions do not skip `NaN`'s for safety reasons. If necessary, you can filter out
the `NaN`'s before processing, for example, `mean(Iterators.filter(!isnan, x))`

Pandas uses `NaN` for representing both missing data and the floating point "not a number" value.
Julia defines a special value `missing` for representing missing data. DataFrames.jl respects
general rules in Julia in propagating `missing` values by default. If necessary,

> the `skipmissing` function can be used to remove missing data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `skipmissing` function can be used to remove missing data.
See the [Missing Data](@ref) section for more information.
```

> In addition, pandas keeps original column name after performing an analytic function.

Reviewer: Why "analytic"?
```suggestion
In addition, pandas keeps the original column name after applying a function.
```

DataFrames.jl appends a suffix to the column name by default. To keep it simple, the
examples above do not synchronize the column names between pandas and DataFrames.jl.

### Grouping data and aggregation

> DataFrames.jl provides a `groupby` function such that one can perform analytic functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DataFrames.jl provides a `groupby` function to apply operations
```

over each group independently. The result of `groupby` is a `GroupedDataFrame` object
which may be processed using the `combine`, `transform`, or `select` functions.

> The following table illustrate some common grouping and aggregation usages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table illustrates some common grouping and aggregation usages.
```

| Operation                       | pandas                                                                                | DataFrames.jl                                        |
|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Aggregate by groups             | `df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean()`                                                       | `combine(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean)`             |
| Rename column after aggregation | `df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean().rename("my_mean")`                                     | `combine(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean => :my_mean)` |
| Add aggregated data as column   | `df.join(df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean(), on='grp', rsuffix='_mean')`                   | `transform(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean)`           |

> | ...and select output columns    | `df.join(df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean(), on='grp', rsuffix='_mean')[['grp','x_mean']]` | `select(groupby(df, :grp), :id, :x => mean)`         |

Reviewer: Also need to keep `grp`?
```suggestion
| ...and select output columns    | `df.join(df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean(), on='grp', rsuffix='_mean')[['grp','x_mean']]` | `select(groupby(df, :grp), :id, :grp, :x => mean)`     |
```

Author: The group key is automatically added:

```
julia> select(groupby(df, :grp), :id, :x => mean)
6×3 DataFrame
│ Row │ grp   │ id   │ x_mean  │
│     │ Int64 │ Char │ Float64 │
├─────┼───────┼──────┼─────────┤
│ 1   │ 1     │ 'a'  │ 4.0     │
│ 2   │ 2     │ 'b'  │ 3.0     │
│ 3   │ 1     │ 'c'  │ 4.0     │
│ 4   │ 2     │ 'd'  │ 3.0     │
│ 5   │ 1     │ 'e'  │ 4.0     │
│ 6   │ 2     │ 'f'  │ 3.0     │
```

Note that pandas returns a `Series` object for 1-dimensional result, so the corresponding
DataFrames.jl examples are made to return an equivalent `DataFrame` object. Consider the
first example:

```python
>>> df.groupby('grp')['x'].mean()
grp
1    4
2    3
Name: x, dtype: int64
```

For DataFrames.jl, it looks like this:

```julia
julia> combine(groupby(df, :grp), :x => mean)
2×2 DataFrame
│ Row │ grp   │ x_mean  │
│     │ Int64 │ Float64 │
├─────┼───────┼─────────┤
│ 1   │ 1     │ 4.0     │
│ 2   │ 2     │ 3.0     │
```

Pandas supports hierarchical indexing. DataFrames.jl provides similar functionality with
the `groupby` function. For example, if you want to drill down the data frame with `grp` equals
`1` and then `x` equals `4`, then we can write the following code:

```julia

> @pipe df |> groupby(_, :grp)[(1,)] |> groupby(_, :x)[(4,)]

Reviewer: This isn't the most efficient nor logical way to write this: better use `filter` instead. The text should explain that `groupby` is useful for efficient *repeated* indexing.

Also, I'd rather avoid introducing `@pipe` here. Let's leave that to the DataFramesMeta page to avoid making things too complex.

Author: Are you talking about using `filter` on the original data frame?  In that case, I would just remove this section altogether and simplify this section. See commit https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/pull/2378/commits/51addbc06666528db71ba889a717d1b785948360

```

Of course, you can also enumerate both levels of grouping with a regular for-loop:

```julia

> for gdf1 in groupby(df, :grp)
>    for gdf2 in groupby(gdf1, :x)

Reviewer: The iterated object is a `SubDataFrame`, not a `GroupedDataFrame`:
```suggestion
for sdf1 in groupby(df, :grp)
   for sdf2 in groupby(gdf1, :x)
```

   end
end
```

### More advanced commands

This section includes more complex examples.

| Operation                                       | pandas                                                                       | DataFrames.jl                                                                     |
|-------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Complex Function                                | `df[['z']].agg(lambda v: np.mean(np.cos(v)))`                                | `combine(df, :z => v -> mean(cos, skipmissing(v)))`                               |
| Aggregate multiple columns                      | `df.agg({'x': max, 'y': min})`                                               | `combine(df, :x => maximum, :y => minimum)`                                       |
|                                                 | `df[['x','y']].mean()`                                                       | `combine(df, [:x, :y] .=> mean)`                                                  |

> |                                                 | `df.filter(regex=("^x")).mean()`                                             | `combine(v -> mapcols(mean, v), select(df, r"[xy]"))`                             |

Reviewer: If https://github.com/JuliaData/DataFrames.jl/pull/2417 adds support for regex this could become:
```suggestion
|                                                 | `df.filter(regex=("^x")).mean()`                                             | `combine(df, names(df, r"^x") .=> mean)`                             |
```

Author: OK, I'll take this now assuming that we are putting them on the same release train...

> | Multiple columns x multiple functions functions | `df[['x', 'y']].agg([max, min])`                                             | `DataFrame([(agg = "$f", x = f(df.x), y = f(df.y)) for f in [maximum, minimum]])` |

Reviewer: So one trick is to use broadcating with a matrix:
```suggestion
| Multiple columns × multiple functions functions | `df[['x', 'y']].agg([max, min])`                                             | `combine(df, vec([:x, :y] .=> [maximum minimum]))` |
```
Maybe we should provide something simpler, but what?

Author: Wouldn't it be nice if `combine` accepts a column name array and a function array as separate arguments and build its own cartesian product? I'm not sure if `combine` could take this new case as it's already very complex. Maybe we can choose a different verb.

Just an idea:
```
julia> function agg(df, cols, funcs) 
           result = DataFrame()
           result.function = string.(funcs)
           for c in cols
               result[!, c] = [f(df[!, c]) for f in funcs]
           end
           return result
       end
agg (generic function with 1 method)

julia> agg(df, [:x, :y], [maximum, minimum])
2×3 DataFrame
│ Row │ function │ x     │ y     │
│     │ String   │ Int64 │ Int64 │
├─────┼──────────┼───────┼───────┤
│ 1   │ maximum  │ 6     │ 9     │
│ 2   │ minimum  │ 1     │ 4     │
```

Reviewer 2: can you please open a separate issue for this? Currently the pattern to use is `vec([:x, :y] .=> [maximum minimum])`. If you feel it is too verbose please comment in a new issue. Thank you!

Author: Removed this example and opened a new separate issue to discuss.
